---
title: Paper | Semantic graph, syntactic trees, and brain hierarchy in psychosis
description:
tags:
categories: Paper
series: Study
lastmod: '2024-09-20'
featuredImage:
draft: false
---

Changes in the structure of spontaneous speech predict the disruption of hierarchical brain organization in first‐episode psychosis

<!--more-->

_**Citation**_: **He, R.**, Alonso-Sánchez, M. F., Sepulcre, J., Palaniyappan, L., & Hinzen, W. (2024). Changes in the structure of spontaneous speech predict the disruption of hierarchical brain organization in first-episode psychosis. *Human brain mapping*, *45*(14), e70030. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.70030

---

_**Abstract**_

Psychosis implicates changes across a broad range of cognitive functions. These functions are cortically organized in the form of a hierarchy ranging from primary sensorimotor (unimodal) to higher-order association cortices, which involve functions such as language (transmodal). Language has long been documented as undergoing structural changes in psychosis. We hypothesized that these changes as revealed in spontaneous speech patterns may act as readouts of alterations in the configuration of this unimodal-to-transmodal axis of cortical organization in psychosis. Results from 29 patients with first-episodic psychosis (FEP) and 29 controls scanned with 7 T resting-state fMRI confirmed a compression of the cortical hierarchy in FEP, which affected metrics of the hierarchical distance between the sensorimotor and default mode networks, and of the hierarchical organization within the semantic network. These organizational changes were predicted by graphs representing semantic and syntactic associations between meaningful units in speech produced during picture descriptions. These findings unite psychosis, language, and the cortical hierarchy in a single conceptual scheme, which helps to situate language within the neurocognition of psychosis and opens the clinical prospect for mental dysfunction to become computationally measurable in spontaneous speech.
