---
title: Paper | Atypical cortical hierarchy in Aβ-positive older adults
description:
tags:
categories: Paper
series: Study
lastmod: '2024-05-01'
featuredImage:
draft: false
---

Functional gradients in Aβ-positive older adults and their relations to prosodic patterns in telephone conversations. 

<!--more-->

_**Citation**_: **He, R.**, Al-Tamimi, J., Sánchez-Benavides, G., Montaña-Valverde, G., Domingo Gispert, J., Grau-Rivera, O., Suárez-Calvet, M., Minguillon, C., Fauria, K., Navarro, A., & Hinzen, W. (2024). Atypical cortical hierarchy in Aβ-positive older adults and its reflection in spontaneous speech. *Brain research*, *1830*, 148806. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2024.148806

---

_**Abstract**_

Abnormal deposition of Aβ amyloid is an early neuropathological marker of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), arising long ahead of clinical symptoms. Non-invasive measures of associated early neurofunctional changes, together with easily accessible behavioral readouts of these changes, could be of great clinical benefit. We pursued this aim by investigating large-scale cortical gradients of [functional connectivity](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/biochemistry-genetics-and-molecular-biology/functional-connectivity) with functional MRI, which capture the hierarchical integration of cortical functions, together with acoustic-prosodic features from spontaneous speech, in cognitively unimpaired older adults with and without Aβ positivity (total N = 188). We predicted distortions of the cortical hierarchy associated with prosodic changes in the Aβ + group. Results confirmed substantially altered cortical hierarchies and less variability in these in the Aβ + group, together with an increase in quantitative prosodic measures, which correlated with gradient variability as well as digit span test scores. Overall, these findings confirm that long before the clinical stage and objective cognitive impairment, increased risk of cognitive decline as indexed by Aβ accumulation is marked by neurofunctional changes in the cortical hierarchy, which are related to automatically extractable speech patterns and alterations in working memory functions.
